Since you have been in the Bay Area you may actually be able to understand when
I tell you where the novel Zurich comes. Zurich is actually the Bay Area. In
some sense anyway. Not literally. But the fact is that I live in the hills of
Oakland in the East Bay. And there's a drive along the ridge of the hills. And I
was up there one evening just at dusk. when the light is such that the bay
itself, which you can look down on, you'll see San Francisco and Marin County
across the bay, and San Jose to the south, and Berkeley and Oakland in front of
you, and a lot of water in the middle. But at a particular time of evening, that
water simply turned black. And I was up there looking at that, and I thought,
I'm like, God, you can't even tell. That's it, it looks like a gigantic hole in
the ground. And immediately I thought, what would a city be like that would be
built around a gigantic shaft into the earth like that? What effect might that
kind of physical environment have on the psychology of the people who lived in
that city, which is how the whole symbolism of, the religious symbolism of the
city of Sur came to me. yeah good I was glad to get that every once in a while
we'll have an author tell us where he gets the idea for a story for instance
Roger Zelazny told us how he got the idea for Roadmarks which just made the whole
show it was beautifully you know beautifully fascinating story it's interesting
where authors get their ideas yeah usually you don't exactly know where you got
your ideas but that was a very clear vision that came to me I hate to use that
word because it seems to me more than it does. But it was just a particular way
that I saw something and things that it made me think. Okay. Let me just pick
out one short story. It's my favorite. The Dance of the Changer and the Three.
Did you have an impetus or an origin behind that one? Yes, I did, as a matter of
fact. That's another one I can pinpoint. I had been reading, of all people,
Roger Zelazny. We seem to be mentioning him a lot here. And Roger at that time,
this was in the late 60s was working a lot with mythology in his science
fiction. And I got interested in his work. I loved his work. And I was always
interested in mythology itself. And it occurred to me that mythology tells a
whole lot about the fears, the hopes, the beliefs of humanity. And that indeed,
if any alien creatures ever came to this planet and wanted to find out something
about what makes humanity tick, they could do far worse than to study some of
our myths. And I suddenly just, there was a little click that goes on in your
head and I turned that around and said, well, I'd like you to think and write
about aliens, and it's very difficult to write about an alien to the inside,
because I personally believe that aliens are inexplicable to us, that we're
never going to understand them fully. So I thought possibly a good way of
dealing with the portrayal of an alien or an entire alien race would be to do it
circuitously by telling an alien myth. And that is exactly what an answer to the
changer in the three years, of course, is an alien myth. And the myth itself is
supposed to tell you a lot about the psychology of the race. Yeah, when I read
that, I got the impression that one of the points of it was that aliens are
likely to be totally incomprehensible to us that there can be no real
communication yeah that was the basic point yeah I've been trying to make that
point in a number of my stories there's another one that I wrote earlier called
top friend which makes much the same point but not quite as thematically as that
is okay could you tell me this about that the dance of the changer and the three
was there a relationship between the dance and the myth you told in the way that
they wiped out the human beings.
Was there a relationship between them? I don't know, frankly. And I don't want
to know. The method that I used in writing that was since I believed the aliens
would be totally understandable to us, every time the story that I was telling
became too comprehensible, I would write something that made no sense whatever.
So that the myth itself, of course, is kind of a self-canceling myth. If you
actually analyze it, there's a certain circularity to it. It has a dramatic
coherence.
But it's not a story that we would ever tell about ourselves that would resonate
with the human psyche and I wanted to end the story with something totally
inexplicable happening just to underscore emphasize the fact that these
creatures were aliens and I wanted it to be something that none of us is going
to understand and that meant inevitably that I had to be sure I didn't
understand it either
okay good could I just end this line of questions by asking you then do I take
it that you this is a totally personal question doesn't involve your work so
much but I take it then that you you think that we may run across alien species
someday in the galaxy I think that we may I have no idea if we ever will there
are so many things against it you have no idea if there are actually any
creatures out there it seems just mathematically that there must be but they're
going to be so far away that I have no idea if we'll actually ever be able to
travel between stars despite the fact that science fiction is always writing
about travel between stars it may well prove to be an impossibility so I have no
idea if we're ever going to uh to manage to meet them we might get in touch with
them um through radio or or through light beams or something like that but even
then I mean, messages traveling at the speed of light are going to take hundreds
of thousands of years to pass back and forth between stars. So, I don't know. On
the other hand, possibly what we know about the laws of physics is not complete,
and the speed of light is not an unattainable velocity, and possibly trans-wide
speed will be possible for us so that we can get out there. If we ever do get
out there, or if indeed other creatures have discovered how to travel faster
than the speed of light, they may come here. But with our present knowledge, it
seems very unlikely. We talked to Dr. Robert Forward not too long ago, and he
was telling us about the latest in possible stellar drive. It has something to
do with Twister space, where he seems to have worked it out where it could be
theoretically possible. Well, it may very well be, yeah. I saw a lecture of his,
in fact, a few years ago some of his ideas about that. And they do seem
possible, but again, there's still theories at this point, and they're nowhere
near being hardware. That's right. Listen, I would... I think your perspective
on science fiction is valuable, and I can't... I mean, the reading you must do
in the field has to be immense to anthologize like you do, and you've read
science fiction, I guess, steadily for over 25 years. I just want to ask you a
few general questions about the field from your perspective in the time you've
been in it since you've been a serious fan of the present have you seen any big
changes in the field and if so what would they be? There have been enormous
changes in the field since then but when I started reading it it was a genre of
adventure fiction almost exclusively there are very few stories that would be
called serious fiction in general. There were a few, but not too many. There
were the exceptions. Whereas today, although we still have our usual complement
of adventure stories, there's our, you know, they're fun stories. There's
nothing wrong with them. But we have a much wider variety of things that we can
write. We can, for instance, a novel like Cirque, which is, Oh, it's an
adventure story, but it's also a story about religion, about philosophy, and so
forth. Something like that simply could not have been published in science
fiction when I was first reading it. There wouldn't have been anybody who would
have taken a chance on publishing it, and I doubt really many people would have
enjoyed it. They simply weren't ready for it. I'm sure I wouldn't have liked
that story. Well, maybe I would have. But I would have had a good deal of
trouble understanding that story when I was 11 or 12 years old, first reading
science fiction. There's been a great deal of improvement in the variety of
things we can do in science fiction and in the literary techniques that are
available to science fiction writers. Largely, that's just a matter of perceived
opportunity. People now realize that it is possible, because people have
demonstrated it by doing it, that it is possible to have good characterization
in a science fiction story, not simply serpent characterization where you can
tell the villains because they were a black ass or something. And there was a
lot of experimentalism that went on in the 60s and indeed is still going on to
some extent, but I think that today there's I characterize the whole change as a
broadening and opening up the entire field. I don't think there's anything that
can be done in any branch of literature that can't be done also in science
fiction with the added dimension of speculation about the future.
Okay, good. We usually ask the authors we talk to also to give their impression
of the old conflict, say, between science fiction and the mainstream. Some
authors think that science fiction deserves its own special category, that it's
unique and fans and authors want to keep it that way. Other people feel that
there should be really no separation between science fiction and mainstream, and
it's only an artificial thing done by the publishing industry. Do you have any
opinions on that? I think both those things are true.
It's an artificial thing done by the publishing industry because they found that
it's a real thing among readers. It's not just in science fiction. It's in any
genre. If you want to read a novel about
whatever, there's a class of novel primarily for women, for instance, in which
women discover their sexuality or how to control their lives or things like
that. Those have been very popular recently. There's a particular way of
packaging such a novel. If you want to read a gothic, there's a particular way
of packaging that, or a western, or something like that. Even a mainstream
novel, there's a particular way of packaging that, a particular kind of cover, a
particular type style that's been found to be more effective than others.
Everything that is published is a genre. Mainstream itself is a genre. As for
writing it, I don't think that people should approach the writing of science
fiction as anything other than simply writing a story, which happens to be
science fiction. I think they should be aware, however, of what's done in
science fiction before so they don't repeat everything. It really gets
embarrassing when you see a very good writer who hasn't worked in science
fiction before turn to science fiction and produce something that is just old
hat. It's been done in science fiction for 50 years. You get embarrassed with
this person. John Updike did a short story in New Yorker about three years ago,
and it was just embarrassing because he obviously didn't know the field. so I
think that anybody who is writing science fiction today should simply approach
it as telling the very best story that he or she can and not underestimating the
audience but knowing the audience knowing what they like the most and if you
want to tell a story that's heavy on philosophy or something like that you've
got to know how to make the people enjoy it while you're doing it But you have
to know that when you're writing any kind of story. You have to know your
audience. And you have to write to people. The old idea of writing from your
soul and just putting it out there pure is absolute nonsense to me. That's just
babbling. You may as well just keep a diary. If you want to write and be read by
other people, you've got to give them enjoyment. And that doesn't mean that you
have to write to them as though they were 12 years old. because if you give them
a really solid
piece of writing if it is good if it is a quality piece of writing it's going to
find its audience a quality piece of writing is something that is enjoyable if
it isn't enjoyable there is no quality to it I don't believe any of these people
who talk about downbeat fiction, for instance, as being depressing. I suppose,
you know, if you read too much of it at a time, it can be, but a given story,
even if the ending is, you know, everybody dies or the main character shoots
herself or something, if the story is a valid story and has an emotional impact
and tells you something about the quality of life, then I don't get depressed in
that because that's a moving experience. I've learned something from it. The
most recent story I've read, as a matter of fact, was The Death of Ivan Ilyich
by Leo Tolstoy, which is, of course, about the death of a man. It's a classic
story. And just to hear that that's what it's about would perhaps turn a lot of
people off and say, oh, gee, that's going to be very depressing. But I don't
think so. I read that story, and I was delighted. That's kind of rambling, but I
suppose I'd ask you a question. Well, that's fine. That's going to make the
whole show by itself. Listen, I had two more questions. You can make the answers
as brief as you'd like. I want you to say just a little bit about fantasy. In
particular, in one of your fantasy annuals, I think it was number three, you
said that the level of writing in fantasy you thought was probably higher than
it was in science fiction. Could you comment on that and maybe say a word as to
why fantasy has become so popular? I'm not sure why fantasy has become so
popular, so I can't comment on that. The only guess I can make is that there
does seem to be a correlation between periods of economic depression and
popularity of pure fantasy. People just seem to want to get away from it
anymore. But that's a guess. As to the quality of the writing, it's simply a
technical matter. it's very difficult in writing about the future, about other
worlds and strange creatures and so forth to write with the kind of precise
detail that you can write about the present day writing about things that you
see every day hear every day, smell every day it's simply technically more easy
to pick out details in a scene to tell that will be recognizable immediately to
a reader. There are many examples of mainstream writers who can set a scene with
a single sentence or a single paragraph or can tell you enormous amounts of
information about what's going on simply by naming things. There's a famous
story by J.D. Fallinger in which he spends one paragraph telling you the
contents of the medicine cabinet of the glass family, and once you know what's
in their medicine cabinet, you know a whole lot about that family. Now imagine
trying to do that about a family that lives 7 million years in the future, or
even 700 years in the future. You wouldn't even know what those things in the
medicine cabinet were. So it's very difficult to do that as briefly as you can
do it in contemporary fiction, or any story that's set in contemporary time.
Since a lot of fantasy is set in contemporary times, fantasy writers have the
opportunity to use that kind of detail, and that's what I meant when I said that
the level of writing in fantasy tends to be higher. It's because it's easier.
Okay, good. My last question then would just be about your own future writing. I
wondered what we can expect from you in terms of your own output, say, in terms
of novels and short stories in the future. Are you planning on going ahead and
doing some more? yes I am as I say I'm working on a couple of very short stories
maybe 2 or 3 thousand words each just because I have a couple of ideas I want to
write there are a couple editors who have interest in them but mainly right now
I'm working on a new novel which will be published probably by Timescape next
year and it'll be quite quite different from CERC
but it'll be very much the same kind of novel in that it will have an adventure
story up front, which I hope will be interesting, but it'll have a lot of stuff
under the surface, not necessarily symbolism and such, but there's building a
lot of characterization and, oh, I'm going to be working with mythic archetypes
again here. And I don't know exactly what I'm going to be doing with that yet. I
haven't worked out all the details and it's still very early in the book, but I
think it's going to be very interesting ok is there anything at all any kinds of
ideas or crusades or things you're interested in that you'd like to to say
before we finish the only crusade I have currently is against people who use the
term sci-fi and I'm sure you've heard that before I don't think I have to
explain it anybody who says sci-fi around me might as well call me a nigger yeah
okay we can understand that and I tell this to everybody you obviously don't use
this term but a number of people who have interviewed me have used that term and
I always say do not use that term or I'm simply going to hang up the phone or
I'm going to walk out of the television studio
yeah I can agree with that totally ok listen what we do now we will these shows
are usually actually aired maybe two months or so after the interview, we will
send you the completed tapes of the show. Great, yeah, I do want to see that. At
this point, our show premiered April 5th, and the network has not yet sent us a
list of stations which carry us around the country. When we get that, we can
also shoot that to you. I'd like to add that, too. Yeah? Mr. Carr, as I
understand it currently, there aren't any stations in the... In fact, I don't
think we have any stations in California yet. We go as far west as Montana, but
we haven't quite made it to the West Coast.
Well, it isn't that important that my friends hear me. Okay, listen, you might,
just before we hang up here, you might give us a little bit of advice, because,
you know, in your experience as an editor, we've been doing this show for a
couple of years. we've been airing it locally and we've interviewed an enormous
number of science fiction authors we have some pretty valuable material you know
some excellent interviews with Jack Williamson A.E. Van Vogt you know some of
the old timers and stuff we think that if we type these up in an interview form
you know that we would have a good chance of getting a book published you know
of interviews who might we contact or how might we go about that do you have any
advice I have very little advice on that I'll tell you that there are a lot of
people who are doing interviews these days. And you're probably aware that there
have been a number of books of interviews published. Most recently as Charles
Blackff göreemakers, McCall. But there are a number of others. And, for
instance, there's a radio station WBAI, or KPFA out here, excuse me, WBAI in New
York, the Pacifica radio station out here, has been doing a science fiction
interview show for about, I don't know, four or five years now, and they have an
enormous number of pages of very good interviews too, and they're interested in
selling these stuff, so I don't know what they're doing. What you might do...
The one person who could tell you a lot more than I could would be Richard
Lupoff, who lives in either Oakland or Berkeley. I think he's in Berkeley and
Claremont Avenue. and he's more or less connected to that radio show so he will
know what they've been doing if I try to find a publisher I'd suggest you call
him find out what he knows or write terms you'll know a whole lot more than I do
OK yeah we realize a lot of people have been doing interviews OK listen we've
taken enough of your time this has taken longer than I thought it would but it's
been an excellent interview and we want to thank you very much for it and good
you ask good questions Yeah, well, we had a lot more, but it's getting kind of
late. Well, back here, it's getting kind of late. Out there, it isn't, but
listen, when your next novel
comes up or maybe one of your anthologies or something, we might want to update
some of the shows. We might drop you a line and talk to you for a little time
sometime in the future again. That's fine. Okay, let's do it. Okay, thank you
very much, Mr. Carr. Okay, bye then. Goodbye.